what is covid-19?

Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) is defined as illness caused by a novel coronavirus now called severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2; formerly called 2019-nCoV), which was first identified amid an outbreak of respiratory illness cases in Wuhan City, Hubei Province, China. [1] It was initially reported to the WHO on December 31, 2019. On January 30, 2020, the WHO declared the COVID-19 outbreak a global health emergency. On March 11, 2020, the WHO declared COVID-19 a global pandemic, its first such designation since declaring H1N1 influenza a pandemic in 2009.

Clinical features

The clinical features of this ailment vary, extending from an asymptomatic state to acute respiratory distress syndrome to septic shock and multi-organ dysfunction. Ideally, this ailment is categorized depending on its severity and this include mild, moderate, severe, and critical [28]. The shared symptoms of individuals with the disease include fever (98.6 per cent), tiredness (69.6 per cent), dry cough, and looseness of the bowels [2].

Mild Illness

Individuals with the minor ailment may present signs of a respiratory tract viral contamination. Noticeable symptoms are dry cough, slight fever, nasal infection, sore throat, malaise, muscle pain and headache [11]. A recent study supports that 81 per cent of the COVID- 19 incidence are mild in severity [14]. At the same time, individuals with minor illness can rapidly worsen into critical cases.

Moderate Illness

Individuals with the moderate disease are likely to present symptoms that are different from those of mild illness. Moderate disease symptoms include cough, breathing difficulty, and tachypnea [28]. In this stage, there are no symptoms of serious ailment.

Severe Illness

Individuals with serious illness are likely to displays symptoms such as pneumonia, acute respiratory distress syndrome, and septic shock. In this stage, diagnosis is medical, and health problems can be left out with the aid of radiographic research. Importantly, 5 per cent of individuals with the illness can acquire a serious ailment with signs of respiratory failure, RNAemia, cardiac complications or multiple organ dysfunction [5]. Further, the mortality rate for critical clients is 49 per cent. Also, individuals with other health complications have a higher mortality rate. Specifically, these health complications are diabetes (7.3 per cent), respiratory ailments (6.5 per cent), heart disease (10.5 per cent), high blood pressure (6 per cent), and oncological problems (5.6 per cent) . This data indicates that individuals without other health complications have a lower mortality rate.


Treatment

The initial step in treating those suspected to have COVID-19 is adequate isolation in order to prevent spread to other contacts, clients, and healthcare providers [8]. The mild disease should be administered at home through staying hydrated, proper nutrition, monitoring fever and cough [21]. Besides, the repetitive usage of antibiotics and antivirals, mainly oseltamivir, should be evaded among those with COVID-19 symptoms [14]. This portrays that there is no specific treatment for this ailment.
